Update window function docs (#17694)
pingcap/docs: functions-and-operators/window-functions.md

The usage of window functions in TiDB is similar to that in MySQL 8.0. For details, see [MySQL Window Functions](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/window-functions.html).

> Because window functions reserve additional words in the parser, TiDB provides an option to disable window functions. If you receive errors parsing SQL statements after upgrading, try setting [`tidb_enable_window_function=0`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_window_function).

Author: These are listed on the keyword page and are marked with `R-Window`. I've added a link to make this easier to find.

The pipeline execution algorithm for window functions can be disabled with the [`tidb_enable_pipelined_window_function`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_pipelined_window_function) system variable.

> Another system variable that influences window functions is [`windowing_use_high_precision`](/system-variables.md#windowing_use_high_precision). This variable can be used to turn off high precision mode.

Author: This is the PR that added this: https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/pull/14887

> Another system variable that influences window functions is [`windowing_use_high_precision`](/system-variables.md#windowing_use_high_precision). This variable can be used to turn off high precision mode.

Author: Maybe @qw4990 can help here?

> Another system variable that influences window functions is [`windowing_use_high_precision`](/system-variables.md#windowing_use_high_precision). This variable can be used to turn off high precision mode.

Reviewer: Sorry, I'm afraid there is no doc about this feature... this is a performance enhancement contributed by a contributor a few years ago 🥹

> Another system variable that influences window functions is [`windowing_use_high_precision`](/system-variables.md#windowing_use_high_precision). This variable can be used to turn off high precision mode.

Author: I think this should be done in a separate PR/issue.

> The window functions [listed here](/tiflash/tiflash-supported-pushdown-calculations.md) can be pushed down to TiFlash.

Author: That's a good question. I don't know the answer to that.

> The window functions [listed here](/tiflash/tiflash-supported-pushdown-calculations.md) can be pushed down to TiFlash.

Author: Looks like there are no window functions listed on https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/dev/expressions-pushed-down and a quick test with TiUP Playground seems to confirm this.

```
mysql-8.0.11-TiDB-v8.1.0> EXPLAIN SELECT ROW_NUMBER() OVER () FROM t1 WHERE id<10 ORDER BY id;
+-------------------------------+---------+-----------+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| id                            | estRows | task      | access object | operator info                                                         |
+-------------------------------+---------+-----------+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Projection_9                  | 3.00    | root      |               | Column#4->Column#5                                                    |
| └─Sort_10                     | 3.00    | root      |               | test.t1.id                                                            |
|   └─Window_12                 | 3.00    | root      |               | row_number()->Column#4 over(rows between current row and current row) |
|     └─TableReader_14          | 3.00    | root      |               | data:TableRangeScan_13                                                |
|       └─TableRangeScan_13     | 3.00    | cop[tikv] | table:t1      | range:[-inf,10), keep order:false                                     |
+-------------------------------+---------+-----------+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
5 rows in set (0.01 sec)
```

```
mysql-8.0.11-TiDB-v8.1.0> EXPLAIN SELECT COUNT(id) OVER () FROM t1 WHERE id<10 ORDER BY id;
+-------------------------------+---------+-----------+---------------+------------------------------------+
| id                            | estRows | task      | access object | operator info                      |
+-------------------------------+---------+-----------+---------------+------------------------------------+
| Projection_9                  | 3.00    | root      |               | Column#4->Column#5                 |
| └─Sort_10                     | 3.00    | root      |               | test.t1.id                         |
|   └─Window_12                 | 3.00    | root      |               | count(test.t1.id)->Column#4 over() |
|     └─TableReader_14          | 3.00    | root      |               | data:TableRangeScan_13             |
|       └─TableRangeScan_13     | 3.00    | cop[tikv] | table:t1      | range:[-inf,10), keep order:false  |
+-------------------------------+---------+-----------+---------------+------------------------------------+
5 rows in set (0.00 sec)

mysql-8.0.11-TiDB-v8.1.0> EXPLAIN SELECT COUNT(id) FROM t1 WHERE id<10 ORDER BY id;
+---------------------------------+---------+-----------+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| id                              | estRows | task      | access object | operator info                                                           |
+---------------------------------+---------+-----------+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Projection_7                    | 1.00    | root      |               | Column#3->Column#4                                                      |
| └─Sort_8                        | 1.00    | root      |               | test.t1.id                                                              |
|   └─StreamAgg_21                | 1.00    | root      |               | funcs:count(Column#7)->Column#3, funcs:firstrow(Column#8)->test.t1.id   |
|     └─TableReader_22            | 1.00    | root      |               | data:StreamAgg_13                                                       |
|       └─StreamAgg_13            | 1.00    | cop[tikv] |               | funcs:count(test.t1.id)->Column#7, funcs:firstrow(test.t1.id)->Column#8 |
|         └─TableRangeScan_20     | 3.00    | cop[tikv] | table:t1      | range:[-inf,10), keep order:false                                       |
+---------------------------------+---------+-----------+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------+
6 rows in set (0.00 sec)

mysql-8.0.11-TiDB-v8.1.0> SELECT COUNT(id) OVER () FROM t1 WHERE id<10 ORDER BY id;
+-------------------+
| COUNT(id) OVER () |
+-------------------+
|                 3 |
|                 3 |
|                 3 |
+-------------------+
3 rows in set (0.00 sec)

mysql-8.0.11-TiDB-v8.1.0> SELECT COUNT(id) FROM t1 WHERE id<10 ORDER BY id;
+-----------+
| COUNT(id) |
+-----------+
|         3 |
+-----------+
1 row in set (0.01 sec)
```

> The window functions [listed here](/tiflash/tiflash-supported-pushdown-calculations.md) can be pushed down to TiFlash.

Author: Clarified this in a0021cd99dd88784ee61d5a163c4a60bd63429f9

    UNION
    SELECT 2
    UNION
    SELECT 3
    UNION
    SELECT 4
) a
ORDER BY 
    n;
```

```
+------+-------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------+
| n    | FIRST_VALUE(n) OVER (PARTITION BY n MOD 2 ORDER BY n) | FIRST_VALUE(n) OVER (PARTITION BY n <= 2 ORDER BY n) |
+------+-------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------+
|    1 |                                                     1 |                                                    1 |
|    2 |                                                     2 |                                                    1 |
|    3 |                                                     1 |                                                    3 |
|    4 |                                                     2 |                                                    3 |
+------+-------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------+
4 rows in set (0.00 sec)
```

## [`LAG()`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/window-function-descriptions.html#function_lag)

> The `LAG(expr [, num [, default]])` function returns the value that is lagging behind `num` values behind the the current value. If there is no current value then `default` is returned, which defaults to `NULL`.

Author: I think that is more clearly explained by the example.

    PERCENT_RANK() OVER (ORDER BY n DESC)
FROM (
    SELECT 5 AS 'n'
    UNION ALL
    SELECT 8
    UNION ALL
    SELECT 5
    UNION ALL
    SELECT 30
    UNION ALL
    SELECT 31
    UNION ALL
    SELECT 32) a;
```

```
+----+----------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
| n  | PERCENT_RANK() OVER (ORDER BY n) | PERCENT_RANK() OVER (ORDER BY n DESC) |
+----+----------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
|  5 |                                0 |                                   0.8 |
|  5 |                                0 |                                   0.8 |
|  8 |                              0.4 |                                   0.6 |
| 30 |                              0.6 |                                   0.4 |
| 31 |                              0.8 |                                   0.2 |
| 32 |                                1 |                                     0 |
+----+----------------------------------+---------------------------------------+
6 rows in set (0.00 sec)
```

## [`RANK()`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/window-function-descriptions.html#function_rank)

> The `RANK()` function is similar to [`DENSE_RANK()`](#dense_rank) but will leave any gaps in case of ties.

Reviewer 2: Maybe also mention that is means absolute ranking, i.e. also taking ties into account / rank of 7 means there are 6 rows with lower rank?

| [`RANK()`](#rank)| Returns the rank of the current row within the partition. The rank may be with gaps. |
| [`ROW_NUMBER()`](#row_number)| Returns the number of the current row in the partition. |

## [`CUME_DIST()`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/window-function-descriptions.html#function_cume-dist)

`CUME_DIST()` calculates the cumulative distance. Note that the window definition should use an `ORDER BY`, otherwise this will not return the expected values.

```sql
WITH RECURSIVE cte(n) AS (
    SELECT 1
    UNION
    SELECT
        n+2
    FROM
        cte
    WHERE 
        n<6
)
SELECT
    *,
    CUME_DIST() OVER(ORDER BY n)
FROM
    cte;
```

```
+------+------------------------------+
| n    | CUME_DIST() OVER(ORDER BY n) |
+------+------------------------------+
|    1 |                         0.25 |
|    3 |                          0.5 |
|    5 |                         0.75 |
|    7 |                            1 |
+------+------------------------------+
4 rows in set (0.00 sec)
```

## [`DENSE_RANK()`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/window-function-descriptions.html#function_dense-rank)

> The `DENSE_RANK()` function is similar to [`RANK()`](#rank) but won't leave any gaps in case of ties.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `DENSE_RANK()` function is similar to [`RANK()`](#rank) but does not leave any gaps in case of ties.
```

> The `DENSE_RANK()` function is similar to [`RANK()`](#rank) but does not leave any gaps in case of ties.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The `DENSE_RANK()` function returns the rank of the current row. It is similar to [`RANK()`](#rank) but does not leave any gaps in case of ties (rows that share the same values and order conditions).
```

```sql
SELECT 
    *,
    DENSE_RANK() OVER (ORDER BY n) 
FROM (
    SELECT 5 AS 'n'
    UNION ALL
    SELECT 8
    UNION ALL
    SELECT 5
    UNION ALL
    SELECT 30
    UNION ALL
    SELECT 31
    UNION ALL
    SELECT 32) a;
```

```
+----+--------------------------------+
| n  | DENSE_RANK() OVER (ORDER BY n) |
+----+--------------------------------+
|  5 |                              1 |
|  5 |                              1 |
|  8 |                              2 |
| 30 |                              3 |
| 31 |                              4 |
| 32 |                              5 |
+----+--------------------------------+
6 rows in set (0.00 sec)
```

## [`FIRST_VALUE()`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/window-function-descriptions.html#function_first-value)

The `FIRST_VALUE(expr)` returns the first value of a group.

> In the following example we use two different window definitions:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following example uses two different window definitions:
```

1. `PARTITION BY n MOD 2 ORDER BY n` resulting in two groups: `1, 3` and `2, 4`. So this returns either 1 or 2 as those are the first values of those groups.

> 2. `PARTITION BY n <= 2 ORDER BY n` resulting in two groups: `1, 2` and `3, 4` So this returns either 1 or 3 depending on which group it is group.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. `PARTITION BY n <= 2 ORDER BY n` resulting in two groups: `1, 2` and `3, 4` So this returns either 1 or 3 depending on which group it belongs to.
```

    UNION
    SELECT 2
    UNION
    SELECT 3
    UNION
    SELECT 4
) a
ORDER BY 
    n;
```

```
+------+-------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------+
| n    | FIRST_VALUE(n) OVER (PARTITION BY n MOD 2 ORDER BY n) | FIRST_VALUE(n) OVER (PARTITION BY n <= 2 ORDER BY n) |
+------+-------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------+
|    1 |                                                     1 |                                                    1 |
|    2 |                                                     2 |                                                    1 |
|    3 |                                                     1 |                                                    3 |
|    4 |                                                     2 |                                                    3 |
+------+-------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------+
4 rows in set (0.00 sec)
```

## [`LAG()`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/window-function-descriptions.html#function_lag)

> The `LAG(expr [, num [, default]])` function returns the value that is lagging behind `num` values behind the the current value. If there is no current value then `default` is returned, which defaults to `NULL`.

Reviewer 3: Should "behind `num` values behind the the current value" be "behind `num` values or behind the the current value"?

Author: No, I don't think so. The current text looks correct to me.

The `LAST_VALUE()` function returns the last value in the window.

```sql
WITH RECURSIVE cte(n) AS (
    SELECT
        1 
    UNION
    SELECT
        n+1
    FROM
        cte
    WHERE
        n<10
)
SELECT
    n,
    LAST_VALUE(n) OVER (PARTITION BY n<=5)
FROM
    cte
ORDER BY
    n;
```

```
+------+----------------------------------------+
| n    | LAST_VALUE(n) OVER (PARTITION BY n<=5) |
+------+----------------------------------------+
|    1 |                                      5 |
|    2 |                                      5 |
|    3 |                                      5 |
|    4 |                                      5 |
|    5 |                                      5 |
|    6 |                                     10 |
|    7 |                                     10 |
|    8 |                                     10 |
|    9 |                                     10 |
|   10 |                                     10 |
+------+----------------------------------------+
10 rows in set (0.00 sec)
```

## [`LEAD()`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/window-function-descriptions.html#function_lead)

> The `LEAD(expr [, num [,default]])` function returns the value leading (preceding) in the window. It is leading by `num` values, by default `1`. And `default` is returned if there is no leading value, this is `NULL` by default.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `LEAD(expr [, num [,default]])` function returns the value leading (preceding) in the window. It is leading by `num` values, by default `1`. And `default` is returned if there is no leading value. It is `NULL` by default.
```

The `NTH_VALUE(expr, n)` function returns the `n`-th value of the window.

```sql
WITH RECURSIVE cte(n) AS (
    SELECT
        1 
    UNION
    SELECT
        n+1
    FROM
        cte
    WHERE
        n<10
)
SELECT
    n,
    FIRST_VALUE(n) OVER w AS 'First',
    NTH_VALUE(n, 2) OVER w AS 'Second',
    NTH_VALUE(n, 3) OVER w AS 'Third',
    LAST_VALUE(n) OVER w AS 'Last'
FROM
    cte
WINDOW
    w AS (PARTITION BY n<=5)
ORDER BY
    n;
```

```
+------+-------+--------+-------+------+
| n    | First | Second | Third | Last |
+------+-------+--------+-------+------+
|    1 |     1 |      2 |     3 |    5 |
|    2 |     1 |      2 |     3 |    5 |
|    3 |     1 |      2 |     3 |    5 |
|    4 |     1 |      2 |     3 |    5 |
|    5 |     1 |      2 |     3 |    5 |
|    6 |     6 |      7 |     8 |   10 |
|    7 |     6 |      7 |     8 |   10 |
|    8 |     6 |      7 |     8 |   10 |
|    9 |     6 |      7 |     8 |   10 |
|   10 |     6 |      7 |     8 |   10 |
+------+-------+--------+-------+------+
10 rows in set (0.00 sec)
```

## [`NTILE()`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/window-function-descriptions.html#function_ntile)

> The `NTILE(n)` function divides the window in `n` groups and returns the number of the group.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `NTILE(n)` function divides the window in `n` groups and returns the number of the groups.
```

Author: I think the current text is correct.

The `RANK()` function is similar to [`DENSE_RANK()`](#dense_rank) but will leave any gaps in case of ties.

```sql
SELECT 
    *,
    RANK() OVER (ORDER BY n),
    DENSE_RANK() OVER (ORDER BY n) 
FROM (
    SELECT 5 AS 'n'
    UNION ALL
    SELECT 8
    UNION ALL
    SELECT 5
    UNION ALL
    SELECT 30
    UNION ALL
    SELECT 31
    UNION ALL
    SELECT 32) a;
```

```
+----+--------------------------+--------------------------------+
| n  | RANK() OVER (ORDER BY n) | DENSE_RANK() OVER (ORDER BY n) |
+----+--------------------------+--------------------------------+
|  5 |                        1 |                              1 |
|  5 |                        1 |                              1 |
|  8 |                        3 |                              2 |
| 30 |                        4 |                              3 |
| 31 |                        5 |                              4 |
| 32 |                        6 |                              5 |
+----+--------------------------+--------------------------------+
6 rows in set (0.00 sec)
```

## [`ROW_NUMBER()`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/window-function-descriptions.html#function_row-number)

> The `ROW_NUMBER()` returns the row number of the resultset.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `ROW_NUMBER()` returns the row number of the result set.
```

| [`CUME_DIST()`](#cume_dist)       | Returns the cumulative distribution of a value within a group of values. |
| [`DENSE_RANK()`](#dense_rank)     | Returns the rank of the current row within the partition, and the rank is without gaps. |
| [`FIRST_VALUE()`](#first_value)   | Returns the expression value of the first row in the current window. |
| [`LAG()`](#lag)                   | Returns the expression value from the row that precedes the current row by N rows within the partition. |
| [`LAST_VALUE()`](#last_value)     | Returns the expression value of the last row in the current window. |
| [`LEAD()`](#lead)                 | Returns the expression value from the row that follows the current row by N rows within the partition. |
| [`NTH_VALUE()`](#nth_value)       | Returns the expression value from the N-th row of the current window. |
| [`NTILE()`](#ntile)               | Divides a partition into N buckets, assigns the bucket number to each row in the partition, and returns the bucket number of the current row within the partition. |
| [`PERCENT_RANK()`](#percent_rank) | Returns the percentage of partition values that are less than the value in the current row. |

> | [`RANK()`](#rank)                 | Returns the rank of the current row within the partition. The rank may be with gaps. |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| [`RANK()`](#rank)                 | Returns the rank of the current row within the partition. The rank might have gaps. |
```

The `NTH_VALUE(expr, n)` function returns the `n`-th value of the window.

```sql
WITH RECURSIVE cte(n) AS (
    SELECT
        1
    UNION
    SELECT
        n+1
    FROM
        cte
    WHERE
        n<10
)
SELECT
    n,
    FIRST_VALUE(n) OVER w AS 'First',
    NTH_VALUE(n, 2) OVER w AS 'Second',
    NTH_VALUE(n, 3) OVER w AS 'Third',
    LAST_VALUE(n) OVER w AS 'Last'
FROM
    cte
WINDOW
    w AS (PARTITION BY n<=5)
ORDER BY
    n;
```

```
+------+-------+--------+-------+------+
| n    | First | Second | Third | Last |
+------+-------+--------+-------+------+
|    1 |     1 |      2 |     3 |    5 |
|    2 |     1 |      2 |     3 |    5 |
|    3 |     1 |      2 |     3 |    5 |
|    4 |     1 |      2 |     3 |    5 |
|    5 |     1 |      2 |     3 |    5 |
|    6 |     6 |      7 |     8 |   10 |
|    7 |     6 |      7 |     8 |   10 |
|    8 |     6 |      7 |     8 |   10 |
|    9 |     6 |      7 |     8 |   10 |
|   10 |     6 |      7 |     8 |   10 |
+------+-------+--------+-------+------+
10 rows in set (0.00 sec)
```

## [`NTILE()`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/window-function-descriptions.html#function_ntile)

> The `NTILE(n)` function divides the window into `n` groups and returns the number of the group.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The `NTILE(n)` function divides the window into `n` groups and returns the group number of each row.
```
